Good. All right. So again, I'll be talking about Monte Carlo Simulation today. First,
a very brief introduction about myself. So like probably many of you on the call, I have a math
and science background, a bachelor's in physics and a master's in operations research. After I
graduated college, I was in the military on active duty and I continue to serve in a part-time
capacity. Towards the end of my time on active duty, I ended up getting my master's in operations
research. And in 2013, I moved here to Minneapolis, Minnesota and began working in the
supply chain analytics field at General Mills. So if you've eaten Cheerios, you've eaten a General
Mills product, they're headquartered here in Minneapolis. They do a lot more than Cheerios
as well. Worked there for a couple of years and then I was recruited to work at Target,
also headquartered here in Minneapolis, where I was the principal designer of e-commerce,
Last Mile Networks for Target. Worked there for about six years and just last month,
left to found my own business, Data-Driven Supply Chain. Essentially, it's my skill set,
applying data science and artificial intelligence to the supply chain. If you want to know more
about that, feel free to contact me separately. I've been an R user since 2012, pretty much since
I was looking for a job. And I've just found it to become an increasingly powerful language for
all sorts of supply chain analytics. And I love math and maps since I was a little kid,
which is probably indicative of me going into this career field. All right. Today's agenda,
how can we use data math and advanced analytical methods to understand risk and uncertainty?
An introduction to the flaw of averages and thinking in terms of ranges, not single values.
And then I'll give a conceptual introduction to Monte Carlo simulation and a very simple example
of it. Hopefully, you know, this is by no means intended to be a comprehensive treatment of Monte
Carlo simulation, but hopefully it'll get you excited about exploring it in your work.
All right. First off, how can we use data to understand risk and uncertainty? You know,
most people are inherently paralyzed by uncertainty and we tend to ignore it in our
lives. There's just way too many things that could turn out to be different than what we're
expecting. You know, so our decisions are typically made based upon either heuristics or, you know,
good rules of thumb or a single estimate, which may or may not be useful in that particular
situation. Like for example, before COVID, I flew quite regularly. And so I knew how long
to plan for, right? I knew I needed to take 10 minutes at the airport, 15 minutes of security,
five minutes for the flight, right? 30 minutes. Well, things have changed, right? Next week,
I'm actually going on my first flights and COVID, and I have no idea what security is like,
I have no idea what to expect. And so my past experience actually is not useful for making
decisions about the future. You know, and what's worst about this is that our ability to objectively
evaluate decisions actually declines the more complex and uncertain the decision is about the
important details. You know, for example, should I go to college? And if so, where? You know,
for some people, the answer is clearly yes, some people it's clearly no, most people it's probably
somewhere in the middle. And so what's interesting is that the tools of Monte Carlo simulation and
other analytical methods from my field of operations research are actually quite useful
for understanding how do we make important decisions under uncertainty. And so while I'm
not here to give you life advice on your education or your career or your marriage, hopefully I can
give you a little bit of mathematics to help you with some other things. And here are a couple books
that I'd highly recommend on our website if you are interested in knowing more about decision
making under uncertainty. Okay, so those of you working in the business world, you know that in
nearly all business decisions, future projections, for example, sales forecasting, or how much a
material is going to cost six months from now, these things may be presented as a single value,
like we're going to sell 1000 widgets next month, or the cost of paper will be $10. But really,
nobody knows that precisely. Those would be more accurately represented as a range,
you know, or a distribution, you know, to actually use the math terms. And so making decisions based
upon a single point value of those inputs, typically the average ignores the impact if
those inputs come in much higher or much lower than than that one input. You know, Dr. Sam Savage,
he's an operations research scientist, he popularized the phrase the flaw of averages,
of course, a take away from the phrase, the law of averages for mathematics, to popularize this
very common mistake. And he wrote about it in an article in Harvard Business Review links up there
and also a subsequent book, both of which I highly recommend. The phrase that Dr. Savage uses that
if you're six feet tall, and you can't swim, it's okay to walk across a creek if it's four feet
tall, right, it's gonna be like up to your chest, if it's four feet deep, sorry, four feet deep the
entire way. But if it's an average of four feet, some parts are two feet, some parts are 20 feet,
if you can't swim, you need to understand the distribution of those depths there,
because you'll drown. And so purely looking at the average rather than the distribution of
those inputs could literally be a killer. So that's the phrase that Dr. Savage pulled together.
Okay, so Monte Carlo simulation, what is it? For those of you who maybe have a little bit
more background in it, this is not a textbook definition, but I think it's really useful for
conveying the idea. It's an analytical method that evaluates a lot of potential combinations
of uncertain inputs, drawing from the range of possibilities of each of those inputs,
and calculates the overall outcome. So if you could think of a function k, or a value k being
the function of three input variables, x, y, and z. If x, y, and z are not single point values,
but rather are themselves distributions, Monte Carlo simulation helps you answer the question,
well, what is the distribution of k? And so, you know, and what are the input, what are the real
world impacts of different segments of k's distribution? So if each of these variables
yield a k, an output variable k that's normally distributed, the middle of that distribution is
going to have one potential outcome, but the high and low tails are going to have very different
impacts upon your real world operation. And so Monte Carlo simulation helps you understand
what, both what is the outcome distribution, and what are the impacts of those.
This is really commonly used in finance for, you know, stress testing is a, that the Federal
Reserve requires is an application of it. Oil and gas industry uses this because they need to
understand what is the potential financial impact of, say, drilling a new well, or any sort of,
any sort of investment. And in my field, supply chain, Monte Carlo simulation can be used in
a number of different ways. One, it can be used to understand the impact of uncertain sales in
the future upon different warehouses and trucking segments in the supply chain. It can also be used
to understand investment decisions around, hey, do I need to buy more trucks? Do I need to buy
more inventory to anticipate for sales, right? There's a lot of different uncertain questions
that will impact the supply chain, and Monte Carlo simulation can be used to evaluate those.
In today's example, I am actually intentionally not using a domain-specific example because I
want it to be accessible to anybody on the call. And I really hope that it will spark in your mind
how you can use Monte Carlo simulation in your work. All right, so a very brief review of the
normal distribution. So those of you probably seen this before, you know, normal distribution
is also called a Gaussian distribution or a bell curve. It's a continuous probability
distribution that is described by two values, the mean or the average and standard deviation.
The image on the left represents a distribution of pizza delivery times after an order is placed.
So the mean is 30 minutes, right down the middle, and the standard deviation is five minutes.
With a normal distribution, it is symmetric around the mean, and that means that a value of one
standard deviation over the mean, in this case 35 minutes, is just as likely as a value that is
one standard deviation below the mean, or 25 minutes. So you can see that the height of the
probability distribution represents probability, and so at 25 minutes and 35 minutes, it's the
exact same height. Standard deviation also can be used to describe the likelihood of a range of
outcomes. Approximately 68% of the values are within plus or minus one standard deviation,
and then 95.5% within two standard deviations, and nearly everything within three.
Kill risk is those unlikely but impactful outcomes that happen when you get the real extremes of the
probability distribution. So in this case, if I'm expecting a pizza to come in 30 minutes,
and it comes in 15, well hey, maybe I was planning for a party, right, waiting for people to arrive,
food will be well, now my pizza's there, people haven't arrived. I'm anticipating at 30 minutes,
and it comes at 45, people are going to be hungry, right, that's going to have an impact
on in different ways. In my example for Monte Carlo simulation, all the inputs will be normally
distributed out of just convenience of the talk, but just keep in mind that in real life,
not everything is normally distributed. Okay. All right, so Monte Carlo simulation example, so
uh, this is the, what I'll use to show the power of Monte Carlo simulation. Keep in mind this is
both fictional and pre-COVID, so it is doubly fictional, so please keep that in mind. I neither
work in downtown Minneapolis nor use the bus anymore. All right, so my neighbor Bob and I,
we both worked in downtown Minneapolis, and we take the same bus from our neighborhood
to downtown in the morning, and then back home in the evening, so same bus route.
Uh, Bob's a good guy, I'd even say he's a friend, so we decided that, hey,
one night on a weeknight, we're going to make reservations to go to a restaurant in our
neighborhood. We'll get our reservations at 6 15 p.m. We'll leave our office at 5 30. We don't
work in the same place, but you know, we'll each leave our desk at 5 30. We'll go to the bus stops,
take the buses back to our neighborhood, walk to our home, and then whoever, you know, we'll wait
for the one that shows up later, then we'll walk to our, walk to the restaurant. Will we make it on
time? Well, I don't know. Bob sure doesn't know. You probably don't know. Maybe Monte Carlo
simulation will help us know, though. All right, and if you're interested in following along at
home, please log into the app there, and I'll actually put that in the chat as well, or if
somebody, somebody else could, I would appreciate that, because I can't really access text right
now. I can do it. All right. Thank you. Okay, so a little bit more specifics of this. I'm at the top
here, and I'm going to leave my office at 5 30 p.m. I'm going to take the Minneapolis city bus
back to my home, and my commute time from when I leave my office to when I get home
is normally distributed with a mean of 30 minutes and a standard deviation of 10 minutes, so that's
a nomenclature for normal distribution mean and standard deviation. My next door neighbor, Bob,
he also has a 30-minute commute. Even though we don't work in the same office,
they're close enough where our commutes are roughly equivalent, and so both of us will have a
30-minute commute from the moment we leave our office to the moment we get to our front doors,
normally distributed with a 30-minute average and a 10-minute standard deviation.
Once we both get home, we'll then walk to our restaurant in our neighborhood,
and that is normally distributed with a average of 10 minutes and a standard deviation of two minutes.
So if we plan our schedule based purely on the average,
we'll both leave at 5 30. The average is 30 minutes. That's 6 p.m. Average walk to the
restaurant is 10 minutes. That's 6 10 p.m. Our reservation is 6 15, so if we plan purely on the
averages, we will show up five minutes early. One thing that's important to keep in mind is
that we may not take the exact same bus. The bus runs every few minutes, so if I show up to the bus
stop right when Bob or right when the bus is pulling up, I'll get on the bus whether or not
Bob's there, vice versa. So that's an important thing to keep in mind.
Okay, so if you're already in the app, you'll see a table like this at the top. I'll go over how to
read it, and then we'll switch over to the app. So as I mentioned earlier, Monte Carlo simulation
is a way to take input variables as distributions and understand the distribution of the outcome
variable, whatever that function is. In this case, the input variables are my commute time,
Bob's commute time, and our walk time to the restaurant. The outcome variable is our arrival
time at the restaurant, and then whether or not we made it in time for our 6 15 reservation.
With Monte Carlo simulation, we can actually simulate this many, many times, and we'll do it
5,000 times, actually. In this first example, I left at 5 30 p.m., and this is all in the 24-hour
clock. My commute is just a little bit above that average of 30 minutes, so I arrived home at 6
at 1 p.m. Bob also left at 5 30 p.m. His commute was 24 minutes, so he arrived actually a little
bit earlier than me. So the later arrival, I was the later arrival, and we left our homes at 6
at 1 p.m. when I showed up. Our walk time to the restaurant was about 10 minutes, 10 and a half
minutes, which meant we get to the restaurant at 6 11 p.m. Did we make any time? Yes, we did,
four minutes. In the second simulation, my commute was 21 minutes. Bob's was about 19 minutes,
so we both got home actually quite early, quite earlier than expected. So we both got home by
5 51 p.m. Again, we took about 11 minutes to walk to the restaurant, so we get there
13 minutes early, quite early, but we made it in time. Third simulation, my commute was dead
on 30 minutes. Bob's was a little bit longer, but by the time we both showed up at home
and walked to the restaurant, we got to the restaurant two minutes early, so we're good.
And in the fourth simulation, things kind of went sideways here. So my commute was only 17 minutes,
but Bob's was nearly an hour. It was 50 minutes long, and so we didn't actually even leave our
homes until 6 20 p.m. after our reservation. Add insult to injury, we took a lot longer than
expected to walk to the restaurant, and so we actually missed our reservation by almost 20
minutes. Okay. Now, I just talked through four. Instead of talking through 5,000 more,
we'll actually just let the computer take care of it, and then we'll go from there. Okay.
All right. So if we do this 5,000 times, we actually only made it on time for our reservation
about 47 percent of the time. Said another way, you only have about a 47 percent chance of making
it on time if you plan purely on the average. Okay. This is the power of Monte Carlo simulation.
By looking purely at my planning factors, I was going to show up five minutes early.
By using Monte Carlo simulation, I can actually see that I'm less than half the time I'm going
to make it on time, and that's really, really powerful. So I will actually then transition
over to working from the app. Reload here. So left-hand side, the control panel, and I'll say
I am not a real, I'm not a shiny developer. I kind of just hacked my way into this for the
presentation, so appreciate or apologize for kind of the entry-level visuals here. Number
today is to simulate. It defaults to 5,000. You can put whatever you want. We both depart at 5 30
p.m. This uses the shiny time add-in, our package for it, and our commute is 30 minutes, and you
can adjust this with standard deviation of 10 minutes, and our walk time to the restaurant is
10 minutes with standard deviation, too. Okay. That's a good point, Robert. We'll actually get
to that in a minute. Okay. So again, this is a table, the result of all 5,000 of our simulation.
Here is a histogram of our arrival time. If we made it in time, it's in blue,
and if we didn't, it's red, and it breaks at that 6 15 mark.
Here's the histogram of my commute time from the simulations. As you can see, it looks,
you know, approximately normally distributed right around an average of 30 minutes, and then
the one standard deviation and two standard deviation marks are those vertical lines.
Bob's commute time is also a histogram, you know, average of 30 minutes, and our walk time is a
histogram at an average of 10 minutes. Okay. And I'll ignore those for now. Okay. So question for
the group. If we are only making it on time, you know, approximately 47% of the time,
what can we do to make it more likely that we will arrive on time?
Anybody answer, please put in the chat.
Leave earlier. Thank you. I was really hoping somebody would say that right away.
Okay. So let's, this is the, again, the power of Monte Carlo simulation. All we need to do is
change the inputs. I'm going to leave, no, not right, not then. I'm actually going to leave
earlier. I'm going to leave at 5 15 p.m. Bob will still leave at 5 30, and now, instead of making
it on time 47% of the time, we now have a 67% probability. Okay. Thank you, Brian. That was
actually going to be the next one. And if Bob also leaves at 5 15,
hang in a little bit. The probability goes up to the high 90%. Okay. Here we go. 95.
And what you see is that once we actually start leaving even earlier than 5 15,
the probability actually doesn't go up that much. Okay. All right. Joe and Brian, yeah,
you guys hit the other one. You got to lower the standard deviations of the commute.
So one of the things about Monte Carlo simulation is you actually get to understand the variability
of, or the impact of the variations of those input distributions. And so, yeah, I mean, if we
have a more dependable commute that is not a 30-minute standard deviation, but rather a
five-minute standard deviation, that improves our reliability from 47 to 67% right there.
If we can get it down even more, down to say a three-minute standard deviation,
you know, we get it to an 86% reliability. What that essentially means is that by lowering the
standard deviation of the commute, we're getting our commute time down to that one single point
estimate of 30 minutes that we'd been planning on initially. Variability is the death of operations.
I totally agree. Okay. So, I mean, you can play around with this. That's kind of the
cool thing about doing Monte Carlo simulation, but we caught the two big ones.
All right. So question for the group. What is the magnitude of being five minutes early versus
five minutes late? Or what's the, what are the different impacts of being five minutes early
versus five minutes late? Yeah, missing a reservation. Yeah. If I show up five minutes
early, I'm going to make my table. If I show up five minutes late, maybe, maybe not. If I show
up 20 minutes early, I'm definitely going to make my table, but I just wasted 20 minutes of my life.
If I show up 20 minutes late, I'm definitely going to miss my table.
And so even though you're wrong in the same way, you're 20 minutes off,
the impact is very, very different. And that's one of the real powers of Monte Carlo simulation
is you can see, hey, if I am wrong on my inputs, I'm going to be wrong on my outputs, but I'm going
to be wrong in different ways. And that really helps drive the conversations around how does
this impact our operations? Like, am I okay being 20 minutes early, but not 20 minutes late? Maybe I
value my time so much that I don't want to be 20 minutes early. And so I'm going to change the way
I'm not going to, you know, show up to the restaurant so early. Okay. Thank you. Thank
you all. We hit the main answers I was hoping we'd hit. All right. So quick question. What is
unrealistic about this simulation? I intentionally put a few things in that were more unrealistic
as a conversation starter. What are some of them?
Normality of the bus route. Absolutely. Yeah. Most transit times are exponentially distributed.
Okay. Yeah. Yeah. We don't exactly have, yeah, we don't have to arrive precisely on time.
Absolutely. Yeah. So really it's more of who's the first person to show up. That's part of it.
Okay. What's another thing? Let's go back to the very last example that I gave.
What's really unrealistic about this one?
Okay. Brandon. Yeah. You got it. Independence of the commute time.
Yeah. The fact is that if me and my neighbor are both leaving downtown Minneapolis and traveling
to our neighborhood at the same time, the traffic conditions are almost going to be,
I mean, they're going to essentially lead that we're going to very similar commutes.
Now, it's not, we don't necessarily need to have the exact same commute time. Like I've
been on a bus that broke down on the side of the freeway. The bus right behind me just went right
by us. And so my commute time was a lot longer than the bus that went right by. But for the
most part, the conditions that impact me and my commute are going to impact my neighbor as well.
And so that actually leads to the, one of the most important things when doing an actual Monte
Carlo simulation study is you need to both define the problem and you need to talk through the
details because in this case, the two input variables, my commute time and Bob's commute time,
they are not independent. They're heavily correlated to each other. And when we're
going to draw from a distribution that represents those, we need to understand that correlation.
Thank you.
Yep. Thank you, Brian. Okay. So takeaways, Monte Carlo simulation is an incredibly helpful tool
for understanding the potential outcomes of uncertain inputs. Really any platform that can
generate random variables can be used, R, Python, if necessary, Excel. And it really helps spur
important discussions on a range of outcomes and the impact of those decisions. So thank you all
for your time. Leave my contact information if you care to reach me and look forward to any
questions I have. And I'll put all this on the website later. While I get them.
Thank you so much, Ralph. That was great. I'm scrolling through the chat to see if there were
any questions yet. So feel free to ask live or put them into the chat.
One comment I had, and I think it would be cool to take this application and apply it to the
Boston train schedules. I wonder if that's something that we'd be able to do.
Yeah, I know the transit agency here in Minneapolis keeps very good records of this.
Stop times.
Sorry, my internet froze for one second. But I see a question from Joe, if you want to ask that live.
Yeah, sure. Um, I was just wondering what type of information about the relationship
between the train schedule and the train schedule.
Yeah, that's a really good question. And I think that's a really good question.
And I think that's a really good question. And I think that's a really good question.
Yeah, sure. Um, I was just wondering what type of information about the relationship between the
two commutes you would need to properly run the Monte Carlo simulation? Do you just like
set them as correlated? Or do you need more information?
Yeah, I mean, I would say you'd you would set them as as understand the correlation,
but ideally, you would have some sort of predictive model that generates it like,
for instance, in Minneapolis, if you're going, going home during a three foot snowstorm,
it's gonna be a lot slower than, you know, a Friday afternoon with with no traffic.
Right. So there's a lot of conditions that lead to that distribution that you then draw from.
Yeah. Great question. Thank you.
I know you mentioned that was just like a basic shiny application that you use,
but I'm curious if you have any tips for people just getting started,
as well, or something that you learned from from making that?
Yeah, reactive data frames are, are a tricky concept to get to. And actually, I really
appreciate talking through the how you how you got around it. Because I mean, I think you all
saw as I was changing things in the app, it was lagging. Right. And as soon as I saw that,
you're sky, I'm like, Oh, man, I wish I did this.
Yeah, it's a really fundamentally different way of thinking about coding. And I came from a
pure sort of our for data analysis background. And I would say if you're just if you're just
getting started in shiny, the the one part of it where I do recommend watching tutorials and
reading things instead of just jumping into it, is like really getting your understanding of what
reactivity means and how it works, because that is the fundamental difference. And it's
really confusing. But it's very powerful once you learn it.
Kai, I know you mentioned you have some helpful links that you can share when you share the
slides, but it'd be really great to know, like what videos are most helpful.
Yeah, for sure. I started out just with the tutorials on the RStudio website,
there are a couple different formats. I really like how RStudio makes tutorials available to
people who prefer to read or people who prefer to watch videos. So I started by watching a video
tutorial and following along with the examples. And I'm also going to link to some articles.
Yeah. And then if anyone doesn't know about the R for data science slack, they have a specific
channel for help in shiny. And so I use that a lot. And that's how I found people who are
willing to sort of pair program with me as well. Cool. Garrett, I see you have a question
on the simulation. Do you want to ask that one live?
Sure. Yeah. So I was just thinking about, so you ran the simulation 5000 times, which I mean,
for probably only two normally distributed variables makes sense. But as a heuristic,
when you start, you know, just trying to apply this to, let's say, a fortune 500 company that
has probably 10s of 1000s of different distributions, it could be tracking,
how many simulations really do you need to start running at that point? And, you know,
what is the best way to decide that? Yeah, so there are formulas that to
understand the relationship between the number of trials and the confidence interval of your output
variable, you know, and so if you want to say, I want to make sure that I get, you know, a 95 or 99%
confidence interval, there's formulas to understand that. On a just kind of a practical level,
it just comes down to what's the relationship between the compute time and how much you're
willing to wait, you know, because if it's something that you're doing once a month,
and you can run it overnight, there's no reason not to rank, you know, really jam up the number
of trials, particularly if you really care about the tail risk. Okay, if I really want to understand
what is the likelihood that we're going to get to the restaurant at 7pm, you're going to need a lot
of trials to, to really quantify that. Thank you.
Rachel, do we have time for a couple more questions? I had someone ask a question in
the chat that I'd love to answer with forever. Definitely.
So I had a question in the chat about the functions that I use to handle the colors,
the RGB and the hex codes. So I wanted to mention two things. First of all, I used the
color picker package from Dean Attali, or I'm not sure if I'm pronouncing his name correctly. But
that so that was a package, the color pickers. And then I used some functions RGB to hex and
hex to RGB to convert back and forth. So that would be my other general advice for people
working in shiny is that a lot of people have made a lot of really great infrastructure. And if you
can rely on that sort of thing, people have, it's possible people have already invented what you
think should be invented, which is really exciting and can sort of stand on the shoulders of giants.
I'll also share the code if you want to look more in more detail at the functions that I used for
the colors. Awesome. Are there any other questions that I missed in the chat that you saw?
Scrolling up, I don't, I don't see any others unless there were direct, direct ones to you,
Kaya or Ralph. If, if anybody would want to, or if you have other questions, and maybe you want to
connect with each other, it could be helpful if we put maybe your LinkedIn links right there,
also, as Kaya mentioned, there's the R for data science, online learning community. I think that's
a great way to connect with everyone as well. So if you're not on there, I'll just put the link to
join. But thank you so much, Kaya and Ralph for awesome presentations. As I mentioned, this was
recorded too. So I'll put the link to the recording on the meetup discussion page. I'll just put
the link to the recording on the meetup discussion page. I'll do that right now. But if anyone has
any other questions for the speakers, or if you maybe want to give a talk next time,
please let me know and reach out through meetup or LinkedIn. I'd love to hear from you.